README.md, before:

# Node Level Performance Optimization

Course material for the CSC course "Node Level Performance Optimization". The course is part of PRACE Training Center (PTC) activity at CSC. The most recent version
of the course is found in the `master` branch, previous versions can be found in Tags.

## Lecture slides

Lecture slides are found in the [course web page](https://events.prace-ri.eu/event/1367/)

## Information about compilers

[Selected options](compiler-options.md)

## Exercises

 - [General instructions](exercise-instructions.md)

### Performance limits

 - [Performance limits](performance-limits)

### Getting started with Puhti and Mahti

 - [Getting started with CSC supercomputers](puhti-mahti)

### Performance tools

 - [Using Intel VTune](vtune)
 - [Using Intel Advisor](advisor)

### Vectorization

 - [Improving performance through vectorization](vectorization)

### Memory optimization

 - [Loop interchange](loop-interchange)
 - [Cache blocking](cache-blocking)

### Miscallenous optimizations

 - [Fast mathematics](math)
 - [Branch prediction](branch-prediction)

### OpenMP tasks

 - [OpenMP tasks](omp-tasks)

### Threading optimization

 - [NUMA aware memory usage](first-touch)
 - [Simple thread affinity](thread-affinity)
 - [Thread affinity in heat equation](heat)

Commit message:

Include some more tasking exercises

README.md, after:

# Node Level Performance Optimization

Course material for the CSC course "Node Level Performance Optimization". The course is part of PRACE Training Center (PTC) activity at CSC. The most recent version
of the course is found in the `master` branch, previous versions can be found in Tags.

## Lecture slides

Lecture slides are found in the [course web page](https://events.prace-ri.eu/event/1367/)

## Information about compilers

[Selected options](compiler-options.md)

## Exercises

 - [General instructions](exercise-instructions.md)

### Performance limits

 - [Performance limits](performance-limits)

### Getting started with Puhti and Mahti

 - [Getting started with CSC supercomputers](puhti-mahti)

### Performance tools

 - [Using Intel VTune](vtune)
 - [Using Intel Advisor](advisor)

### Vectorization

 - [Improving performance through vectorization](vectorization)

### Memory optimization

 - [Loop interchange](loop-interchange)
 - [Cache blocking](cache-blocking)

### Miscallenous optimizations

 - [Fast mathematics](math)
 - [Branch prediction](branch-prediction)

### OpenMP tasks

 - [Simple tasking](simple-tasks/)
 - [Parallelizing Mandelbrot with tasks](mandelbrot/)
 - [Exercises from Eurofusion tutorial](omp-tasks)

### Threading optimization

 - [NUMA aware memory usage](first-touch)
 - [Simple thread affinity](thread-affinity)
 - [Thread affinity in heat equation](heat)
